# How to measure farming outcomes - a new economics?

As I look back on a successful 2022, I find myself preoccupied with **natural resources** - their origin, their utility and their impact. Let me expand.

During the course of the year my ideas around [**appropriate technology solutions**](https://listt.io/) for agriculture developed further. It coincided with a reshuffling of my professional roles and a continued anxiety to start building something of my own which will have a positive impact on the world around me. The impact I want to have is ultimately a more _liveable planet for all_. The most practical and accessible solutions in my eyes are found in how we manage our natural resources. Instead of extracting them to prop up our balance sheets for yet another season, we must start to properly account for their use and think about their finite (or in some case infinite) nature. The contradiction of **infinite growth on a finite planet** and all that jazz...

Agriculture is the practice of managing landscapes while producing food to sustain human life on Earth. We've successfully built systems that allow a small number of people to work in the rural economy to produce the _quantity of calories_ required by the global population - well, mostly. It is becoming evident, however, that these systems are fundamentally unsustainable - they rely on **extracting** natural resources without properly replenishing them. This has lead to degraded soils around the world and increasingly fragile natural ecosystems - a huge worry, both in terms of global warming and having enough to eat.

Returning to practices that have evolved from _natural processes_ allows us to farm in harmony with nature, replenishing essential resources instead of eeking out yet another uncertain harvest. Focusing on building soil while producing _quality food_ - embracing and promoting complex biodiversity below the surface of our Earth - is broadly called **regenerative agriculture**. The ecological case for transitioning to such systems at scale is compelling - but what of their _economics_?

Being an idealist, it's difficult to get dragged down to the reality of figures. However, there is no successful model for regeneration without a **compelling business** case - as dry as that may sound. What feels necessary, is to redefine the value that is created in such a business and properly account for it. If a farmer is producing X% less of a crop, but with Y% less inputs, that may already be a viable business. If in addition, there is **additional value created** - better soil resilience, more biodiversity, abudant nutrients - surely that's a more successful business outcome? Should such a business not be compensated for this? If a market is unable to recognise this value is it the farming system that needs fixing or the _market metrics against which it's measured_? I'm increasingly convinced that it is indeed the latter.

As I gear up for a busy 2023 developing appropariate technology solutions to support growers, farmers and land workers in their tireless work to safeguard and **regenerate natural reasources**, I anticipate a new economics to follow suit. Trust I'm not alone!
